the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
so again the equivalence point is where
you've added all of the moles of your
strong base that you need to convert all
the moles you had of the weak acid to
its conjugate base so if we have this
type of problem a strong base titrating
a weak acid the pH is going to be
greater than seven at this equivalence
or stoichiometric point and we can see
that in the plot here's pH seven little
arrow going up indicating it's going to
be greater than seven and that's because
we have just the conjugate base left at
this point
so again pH depends on the property of
the salt that's formed at the
equivalence point and when it is a weak
acid being titrated with a strong base
then and that's what we have here weak
acid strong base you're going to get a
salt and water but this salt now is
going to have basic properties and we
saw this before that sodium has no
effect on pH things in Group one are not
going to have any effect on pH but H co2
- is a conjugate base of a weak acid it
is a weak base itself so this is going
to be basic and so that's why the pH is
going to be greater than seven remember
salt and water problems really break
down to weak acid in water or weak base
in water problems depending on what went
into foreign that particular salt so
when you're doing these problems and if
you're running exam and you get to the
end and you're you know that the pH
should be greater than seven but the pH
you calculated for some reason you don't
know where you made the mistake is less
than seven if you say to me this doesn't
make sense it should be greater than
seven because it should be basic at this
point I should just have conjugate base
around you will get points back for
recognizing that that's what at the end
the answer you gave me can't be right so
always pay attention to what answer
you're getting does that answer make
sense I really care more about
that people understand what's going on
then they can do the math perfectly in a
very short amount of time alright so but
you'll often be asked to calculate the
pH so let's think about how we would
calculate the pH we know it's greater
than seven but what is it exactly for
this problem and to do that we need to
first know what the volume is going to
be what volume of that strong base do we
need to add to reach the stoichiometric
or equivalence point so we had in the
beginning 2.5 times 10 to the minus 3
moles of our weak acid so that means
that at the stoichiometric point we're
going to form that number of moles of
conjugate base and that also means that
to do that we need to add that number of
moles of the strong base so we need to
add two point five times 10 to the minus
3 moles of our strong base we know the
concentration in the strong base 0.15
molar so we can calculate that the
volume we need is sixteen point seven
milliliters now the total volume to get
to the stoichiometric point was twenty
five that's what we had originally Plus
this sixteen point seven so 41 point 7
milliliters or a point zero four one
seven liters we can calculate the
molarity of the conjugate base that's
formed how many moles in this total
volume gives us a molarity of point zero
six zero zero molar and now we can go
ahead and solve the problem but why
don't you tell me how we're gonna solve
the problem what are we gonna use to
solve this problem
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
all right yep so KB and so if we look at
this problem for a minute so this is
again the type of problem it's a weak
base problem we've converted all the
weak acid we had to its conjugate base
because we added in enough moles of the
strong base to convert all the weak acid
to the conjugate base so the equivalence
point all we have is the weak base so
this is a base in water problem so we
write our base plus water going to the
conjugate acid plus hydroxide and when
it's a base and water problem you should
have hydroxide on the other side so we
can set up this expression we at point
zero six molar minus X X plus X and we
can use KB to solve the problem and KB
in this case is five point six times ten
to the minus eleven that's going to be
equal to x squared over point six point
zero six zero zero minus X so if I was
given ka and a now nikkei B what do I
use to convert ka and KB so we could
easily convert between these two not a
problem all right
so this is how you would do the problem
and always remember ask yourself what
type of problem is it if it's weak base
and water you want a KB so can I use
henderson hasselbalch for this no I
can't and you should not as well all
right so what do you do after this
you should be able to go from here we're
not going to go through all the steps we
can simplify pretend X is small make
sure X is small and in this case X is
quite small of 1 point 8 3 times 10 to
the minus 6 molar from that we have to
remember that X now is the hydroxide ion
concentration so we're going to
calculate Poh first and then calculate
pH by subtract 14.00 minus Poh to get us
the pH
and now it's 8.26 that's above seven
that number makes sense if I had stopped
and forgotten what X was and realized
the pH was five point seven four I
should have realized there was a problem
there all right so weak base in water
problem so we go up here that's point s
the stoichiometric point we have a pH of
eight point two six now we've added this
little E at the end we're just going to
think about the last type of problem you
might see which is past the equivalence
point so here you're at a volume beyond
the volume needed to get you to the
equivalence point and at this point you
have your conjugate base in solution but
you're adding a lot of concentrated base
of sodium hydroxide to that solution so
the amount of the conjugate base that
you have there is really not going to
contribute to pH anymore not compared to
the pH change that's going to be caused
by just putting extra strong base into
solution so the pH is really going to be
determined by the excess amount of NaOH
you have and you can pretty much forget
all the work you just did in calculating
what the pH was due to the conjugate
base because that's gonna be overwhelmed
by this and I'll show you that that's
true
so what this is then is a strong base
and water problem so beyond the
equivalence point now we're a strong
base in water problem so how do we do
this and we saw this already but we'll
just review it one more time so our five
mils past the equivalence point so we
are going to figure out how many extra
moles of O H we added five mils times
our concentration so we have seven point
five times ten to the minus four moles
that are extra and now we need to
calculate the concentration and we have
to remember our volume so we added five
extra mils we had 25 to begin with and
we use sixteen point seven to get to the
equivalence point and so when you have
the whole volume in there you can
calculate
your concentration is point zero one six
molar Oh H then from that we can
calculate Poh and from that we calculate
pH and it's twelve point two one and
just to convince you that it was okay
that I forgot all about that conjugate
base
remember the concentration that we had
calculated that of Oh H that's due to
that weak base in solution this number
really small compared to that number and
if you want to be very particular you
can add this to this before calculating
this but it's really not going to give
you to the number of significant figures
you have it's not gonna make any
difference whatsoever so this is a
strong base in water problem we're only
going to think about how many moles
extra of o H do we have and what is the
total volume and then you're done
alright so now we've done this whole
curve we start at the beginning it was a
weak acid problem down here we went into
the buffering region we can use
henderson hasselbalch here we can do a
very simple calculation at the half
equivalence point pH equals PKA then at
the stoichiometric point were a weak
base problem and then we're a strong
base problem alright so you can now do
the same thing the other way yeah
question
Yeah right so we skip tea because there
was a lot of different points yeah so if
you're if you're in a region where you
have a subsonic it acid conjugate base
you can assume that's in the buffering
region so you need to have both to be in
the buffering region if the problem only
has your weak acid in water and
initially you have sort of zero of the
other but if you've added some of the
strong acid strong base that means
you've converted some but you're in you
know you're not at the equivalence point
yet you can assume a buffer problem and
then pretty much it's kind of in the
buffering region unless it's right here
or right there so pretty much anywhere
in here you can assume it's going to be
a buffer problem and when you do the
subtraction you should see that you had
you know you're weak you're weak acid
and you've converted something to the
conjugate you can see that you have
amounts of both when you do that
subtraction and when you have
concentrations of both then you're in
the buffering region so you do you would
do D the same way that you did B yeah
that would be the same and then if you
want to make sure that you're not there
but you should know that when you start
the problem you can you know how many
you calculate begin when you start doing
these problems are gonna calculate say
how much moles of the weak acid you had
and then you calculate how many moles of
the base you added and if they're equal
then you're like oh I'm not in the
buffering region I'm at the equivalence
point if they're not equal if the number
of moles you've added or less of the
strong base but nonzero then you're in
the buffering region other any other
good questions and we're not going to go
the other direction we're not going to
do all the points on the other one but
there's a problem set for that so all
right but not gonna leave acid base
quite yet we're almost there but not
quite yet because I got to say a little
more about PK's
so PK's are not just important in
titration problems and i want to share
with you one of my favorite videos about
why pk's are important
I'm a rising senior at MIT and for the
past 3 years I've been working with
Alice ting my project is in the field of
chemical biology which means that I'm a
tool maker and I've been making tools to
allow people to look at proteins we want
to see where they are what they're doing
what they're interacting with but all
proteins and all cells are completely
transparent whenever you look at them
under a microscope so we use an enzyme
to attach an organic molecule a very
very small molecule to the protein so
that we get the same fluorescent output
we see a bright light whenever we shine
laser light on it and look at it under a
microscope after some very complicated
research we came up with a very basic
problem in our design we had a mismatch
between our probe and the pH of the
cells cells typically exist at about 7.2
to 7.5 pH that's what's healthy for them
they need that and you go outside those
boundaries they're very unhealthy and
they behave abnormally and the pKa of
our probe is also 7.5 pKa is the point
where any sort of species is half
protonated half deprotonated and our
probe needs to be deprotonated it needs
to be in some sort of basic solution
compared to its PKA in order for it to
be visible in order for it to glow since
our pKa of our fluorescent molecule and
the pH of the cells exactly match up
that means that our probe is half
protonated half deprotonated this is a
huge problem for our labeling because it
immediately means that we're at 50%
efficiency
we couldn't get more than half of these
molecules to glow and we couldn't see
more than half of our proteins our
solution was to change the pKa of the
probe so we changed to a different
molecule that's very very similar and we
hoped would work with our system but has
a much lower PKA 3.5 which allows us to
work through all these neutral PHS and
these physiological PHS and still be
very bright and still be completely
deprotonated a lot of diseases are
caused by mutations which change where
proteins are going it either locks them
into a specific compartment or puts them
in places that they don't need to be
I hope that my work can be used by other
people to study their own systems they
can use my process to label that protein
and then look at disease cells and find
out where that protein is and what it's
doing hopefully this can be used to
unlock the keys to new therapeutic
methods in medicine so that was Samuel
he graduated he's now at UCSF in
graduate school and talking about his
research in Alice tangs lab Samuel was
my academic advisor
he's a chemistry major and then in the
later part of graduate school he
actually switched and did research in my
lab and so I was one of my favorite
videos and I miss Samuel anyway so it
shows an undergraduate just like you
caring about pk's that's why it's one of
my favorites
okay so let's do a couple clicker
questions related to Samuels video and
so now consider what if the pKa of the
probe had been 10 how much of it would
glowed at physiological pH what can you
say about that probe
okay ten more seconds
all right so let's take a look at the
answer so most of it not much of it is
going to be glowing is the answer to
that part and let's just look at why
that's true for a minute okay so in this
is what samuel talked about in his video
that at ph 7 or the ph physiological ph
they had one probe where the pKa was
equal to the pH they were using and so
as samuel told you if we think about
henderson hasselbalch that's going to
mean that the ratio of h a to a is going
to be equal to one it's one to one
and so that's going to mean only 50%
maximum efficiency and so here you see
that when the pH is equal to the pKa you
have equal moles of H a as you have a
minus so you're not going to have more
you can't possibly have more than 50%
efficiency 50% more glowing but then in
their design strategy what they did was
they used another molecule with a
different PKA one of 3.5 and now the pH
is much greater than the pKa and so as
you go above pH is above the pKa you get
more and more deprotonated species so if
you use henderson hasselbalch here you
could calculate the ratio is 1 to 8,000
so you're going to have a lot of glowing
probe under those circumstances and then
the clicker question that I just asked
you is what happens then if your PKA was
10 so now you have a situation where the
pH is below the pKa and if we did the
math we would see that the ratio now a
protonated to deprotonated is 400 to 1
so very little glowing so this is an
important thing to think about and doing
these other kinds of problems when the
pH equals the pKa you have equal amounts
of H a and a minus pH is above more
deprotonated
pH is below more protonated alright so
let's try one more clicker question and
see now thinking about the pka's of
three different groups here for this
amino acid which structure would you get
should this amino group be protonated or
deprotonated NH 3 plus or NH 2 O H or o
minus and Oh H or Oh minus here all
right let's just take 10 more seconds I
know a lot of people aren't done but we
have a demo that we need to get to in a
t-shirt vote to get to
all right not bad oh we have no answer
to it but it is d so so this is a
structure so here for these two we have
PKS that are high there above the PA
above the pH so we expect them to be
protonated and here we have a PKA that's
below the pH so expect that to be
deprotonated so again you want to think
about how does the PK relate to the pH
all right so that is now the end of the
acid bases end of exam three material